# I Like Clean Code

This shouldn't be a surprise, and 99.9% of developers will say the same thing, but it wasn't until about a year or two ago that I fully realized _why_ I like clean code.

Sure, properly formatted code is easier to read, but this is just one aspect of what I consider *clean* code - especially when considering development in the WordPress world. I have heard people say that WordPress is to PHP as jQuery is to JavaScript, and at a philosophical level, I agree. WordPress, just like jQuery, has a set of core functions that leverage PHP and database calls to make a developer's job easier. It is because of this that when developing in a WordPress environment we _must_ use as much core functionality as possible.

But, let us go further and define what we mean when we talk about _clean_ code. Clean code also refers to _maintainable_ code, and this is key. Whether you are working on a product, a client project, or personal work, your code needs to be maintained. Developers are rarely working alone or at one time, and eventually, they will either need to share the code they've written with other co-workers, on-board new developers to a project, or go back and decipher the could they've written months or years earlier. Having standards in place make these tasks much easier. In a perfect world, a developer should be able to look at code in any given project and be unable to distinguish their own work from that of another developer, because that code abides by that same set of standards.

But maintainable coding practices and standards alone are only a part of _clean code_. Another aspect specific to WordPress is _how_ we choose to organize our code. For example, think of a custom page template that might have four different queries on it. When first beginning to work with WordPress, a developer might write a basic wp_query, and in this example, they could easily use the same snippet four different times - and this works, it works just fine. I still see this regularly when reviewing code written by beginner developers online or at WordCamps, and it is one situation that is a perfect teachable moment. [Dan: are you trying to describe DRY here, and why you should place repeatable code snippets into functions? I think that piece is missing.]

Many WordPress developers are self-taught (I certainly am). This is great, because it means that this individual went out of their way for one reason or another to learn something! But, often what they learn happens in isolation from others who code, and without access to one-on-one guidance from more experienced developers. The first time I show a developer how to streamline their four separate queries with just one simple change, their eyes always light up! :)

And this brings us to another topic on clean code: the separation of *logic* from *display*. Logic refers to the retrieval of the actual data that will be displayed on the front-end, and it can quickly complicate your theme templates. Therefore, keeping *logic* code out of your *display* code is a must. Display code, on the other hand, handles how that data will actually appear on a user's screen. This includes HTML/JavaScript/CSS, etc. When working on teams, there are often individuals with different specialties, and keeping logic and display code separate can also help with developer workflows. A front-end developer shouldn't need to be digging through PHP `if` statements to determine where an HTML class should be updated, and a back-end developer need not consider the final output of the data until it is necessary. Lastly, separating logic from output will also help minimize conflicts that arise when performing a `git merge`, which can save a lot of time, as well.

## Plugins

Now, I almost exclusively work on client projects. This means that I mainly build custom themes for clients, and I typically don't consider much what might happen if my client eventually chooses to change themes. This is because my client hired my employer to _build a custom solution for them_, and they realize that [Dan: it's not clear here what the client should realize.]. To this end, for a few reasons, I believe that the number of plugins a site uses should be kept to as few as possible:

1. Security: if you didn't write the code, _you_ cannot guarantee its level of quality.
2. Data: Many plugins will result in data being stored in different areas on the database (or even creating their own tables). On the surface this doesn't seem like an issue, though let me tell you - when you have to dig through a database just to find which one out of 40 plugins installed is controlling a setting, you will waste a lot of time.
3. Project maintainability and customization: if you didn't write the code, you can't maintain it.

[Dan: you might consider talking here about the difference between theme (display) and plugin (logic), and reasons why you might create a content plugin for your client to help facilitate future theme updates.]

Let's look at item number #3 above in more detail. We all know that plugins can be great, though rarely do they get us everything that a client actually wants. This means the client may need to concede on features, or you (as the developer) need to somehow alter a plugin's code in order to get the client the functionality that they want. In the best cases, the plugin in question will have the hooks and filters that you need to do custom work, though more often, this is not the case, which leaves you with the worst option: *hacking the plugin*.